With my
Hello.
Afternoon.
Good afternoon. Come, come and join us.
Yeah. Yeah. Looking For my, um,
We have no meeting.
Yeah. Have, have a seat. Have a seat. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Have a seat
There. Yes.
Yeah. Mr. Mr. Ingram. It is. Yes. Correct.
Well, on guys. Take your time. Thank you.
And thank you everyone for your, uh, time indulgence today
to, we've just, um, as a result of the, uh,
death of Jim Bulger.
Oh, the house, everything.
So, the house had actually been, um, suspended, um,
after the tributes played today.
It's just a, the death primary.
So that's why we, our times are a little, yeah.
Um, tentative. So thank you very much for,
for your indulgence.
So we'll just, uh, introduce ourselves
to everyone while we are all here.
I'm Greg O'Connor. I'm the, uh, chair
of the, uh, petitions committee.
I'm Greg Fleming, uh, nationally.
And I'm Paul Garcia and National MP for Newly in,
And I recognize the anyone's MP here being locally in o
Can I take it if you have no woman in the committee?
We do, but, um, our green member is,
uh, we're not quite sure.
We, we have our, normally we have, um, a member
of the green, so she's not here today, so
May may I respectfully say that, uh, I, I feel it is,
uh, a great shame not to have a woman
as this is very much a woman's issue. Well,
We, we, we can only, we, we can't determine which
of our people, um, come or don't. So
I, I understand that, but I, we certainly have
A, we certainly have a female on the phone issue,
but, uh, not today.
Thank you For a reason. We're not quite sure
That that's okay.
Carter is our normal, um, green member. Is there?
Yes, yes, yes. Normally on committee.
And, but you are right. It would've been,
particularly given the, um, content of the,
uh, petition, it would've been
However, Um, on We'll promise we'll do our best
to make sure that, uh, if
It could be noted, then I'd be very grateful.
Yeah.
Alright. Now, um, string, we have done 10 minutes.
Um, you can take your petition as having been read, um,
but, uh, and leave time for questions.
But, uh, 10 minutes is yours.
Could you give me a two minute
call? That is a eight minute,
Please. I'll, I'll, I'll
promise you a two minute call.
Fine. Thank you. 'cause I, I will. Yes, that's right.
Well, good afternoon, and thank you
for inviting me along democracy and in action.
Uh, I'm Chris Ingram, retired health professional, um,
with a deep interest in, in medical matters
that can benefit New Zealand.
And, and with respect, I, I believe that this sign would,
uh, achieve that.
Um, this has been on my mind for a while.
I, I knew, uh, a lady with a daughter,
the daughter grew up married,
found she couldn't have children adopted a child.
The child had behavior problems and,
and was diagnosed with Fs D.
And so I've, I've experienced from, from that distance
the, uh, how, how they loved and cared
and made the best of, of, of that child.
Um, yes.
Um, and it, it, um, I, I discovered
that it was a preventable condition.
It was preventable. And to my mind came a
what if thought?
What if being preventable?
What if you could tell people, alert them to the medical
of medical MOH advice to, um, avoid alcohol?
And so that's why I'm here today.
That's why you are here today and, and supported here.
And thank you for that.
Oh, come on, come on.
Um, the purpose of, of the bill is, is of course,
to request this be mandated, uh, for appearance on every one
of the 12,465 liquor outlets in New Zealand.
One in each one that is one inside and,
and a three size up on the wall in the supermarket.
You, you might imagine, um,
where it can be seen, uh, everywhere.
So important, um, where everywhere is sold.
Um, and, and there's three key key points of this.
Um, every drinking New Zealand over age 18
will pass by this to buy drinks.
Um, a hundred percent that advertising as it were.
Um, it'll educate and it'll reinforce this.
Um, and especially for pregnant women
and for whom knowledge is empowerment,
knowledge is empowerment.
And that would give them that.
Um, uh, secondly, it's a pre-purchase advice
that is already, we've, we've happily got signs on bottles,
but that's in the hand before it's read
and they pour down the sink.
I'm not sure about that.
Um, so it, it's before that.
And, and it means that, uh, a woman can,
can make an informed choice.
I'll turn away, I'll not buy it.
I, I'll go in and buy zero or,
or of course I'll ignore it and just drink anyway.
But an informed choice.
And, um, um, and, and the women who are not pregnant
and, and the drones, um, sorry, males, they, um,
they will be informed of this and,
and I believe would feel supportive for, for the,
the pregnant ladies and, and, and support and,
and would be normalized for them.
Um, um,
and I believe a normalization for abstention would come, uh,
a normal new, uh, thing.
And I believe, I, I believe it could produce a tipping point
where instead of two
or 3000 fes FSD babies a year, that
that's five or eight a day.
And look, five have been born today already.
Another three to go. That's scary.
And I believe this will do it a tipping point.
When did I see a man with a f*g in his mouth?
Tobacco has hit that tipping point and,
and is no longer a fact.
I believe this could be the same there.
The purpose, um, I want, uh, legislation for the placement
of this sign, um, everywhere.
Uh, the MOH should report yes, the two
or 3000, uh, figures are born this way.
Um, and the, uh, ministry
of Health says they want a New Zealand
where people are supported to abstain
and have alcohol free babies.
It's supported by it. It, it's their idea.
There's, there's an action plan on the way.
And, and look, I I, I, I'm spayed ready for this.
I, I could sell a tape it up on Bellamy and,
and wherever, right, right now.
And, and I'll talk about the legislation that's possible.
But I'd like to tell you
of my two experiences going into liquor shops.
Uh, the first one, I took it in and talked to the guy
and he grabbed it out of my hand
and said, look, I've got three sons.
You can put it up on the wall right now.
I wanted with people to see this. Went to another one.
And he said, that'll be a weight
of my mind to have that there.
My wife's a midwife. And she comes
and talks, opens with
the framework already exists for legislation.
It's the SSAA where you, the, uh, supply
and sale of alcohol act.
Sorry, here it is. Uh, you'll be familiar with this one.
Um, it's 13 years old.
And the object is, is to minimize harm.
You are, you are all empowered.
You, you should be doing it now. That's, that's your job.
I've just come along to tickle you up, really.
And, and, um, it's, it's to avoid
people injuring themselves to inappropriate consumption
and to the, uh, society or, or,
or neighborhood generally.
And also 4 0 1 that says that, um,
that, that, um, uh, to display at points of sale,
um, if it's potentially harmful to people like,
like pregnant women.
So it's there and,
and it's, it's a matter of adapting that law, which,
which specifically says you gotta do it
because it's, it's a, a bad thing happening.
Um, yeah. And, and it's been there for 13 years.
So what the hell have you guys been doing to,
to do something about it?
Um, it's, it's, but now is the time.
Don't let it hang around for another 30 years.
And the alcohol industry will say, delay, delay.
Think about it. Do do it another way.
But I'm saying, you know,
certain bloody kids our precedent.
Yeah. Well, there certainly is. Here we are.
This is in Canada. Um, uh, the president, this has been
around for, for, uh, 21 years.
21 years. So one of the mps in Ontario adopted a child,
fsd, grew up, committed suicide.
And, and, and he said,
I've gotta warn the people that this doesn't happen.
Uh, again, so this is Sandis Law.
Um, and he took it to Parliament and,
and it was unanimously approved.
It doesn't happen often. It was Sandis law.
And, and it, it, it, um, it's, it's a thing.
Um, so it, it's already there. You've got a precedent.
Um, and here in New Zealand, there were concerned groups who
followed the liquor shops seeking approval.
And they say, we'll, remove our objection if you
put this sign up in the window.
And this has happened, point Chev Supermarket and,
and several other places.
So as a community initiative, it's happening, but,
but we wanted it in, in 12,465,
because that's the way it is.
Vision. Vision, the as requested, I'll just,
uh, we come to the two minutes, the two minutes call.
Right, right. Thank you very much.
Um, we have a vision where, where,
um, in a bar in a couple of years time, uh,
there'll be women drinking and, and,
and being supported abstaining.
Uh, there'll be a sign on the, on the door, which says on,
on the wall, which says, uh, expectant mum, uh,
have a mocktail on us.
Just ask. That's, that's the way to do it.
And that would get, uh, a lot of, uh, support there.
Um, the, the massive cost, um,
$4.8 billion a year,
double that for alcohol generally.
Uh, and so I believe that you've got every reason
to, to push that.
Um, I obtained a, a set of, uh, quotes
for putting this thing up.
Um, and,
and it would cost, uh, 80, 80 cents
to have four of these up.
And look, if I gave you any sense, would you go
to your electorate and put one up for me?
For yourself? Really? It'd be there for your lifetime.
And when you passed, you'd say, gee, I will be saving lives.
All you do for the whole of the nation, we want,
we want kids to have a good shot at life.
That's what you said in your maybe speech.
Everybody should have a good shot at life. Well do it.
Thank you.
Alright. Thank you very much. Very compelling.
Uh, member, any questions? Uh, but
Thank you. Or just
thank you very much.
Yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm keen to see how we can explore this to,
so that the next parts of this hearing will be,
will be really instructive, uh,
In terms of, Uh, in terms of what might be
Possible. I'll just add that these kids,
the fetus has no voice. Yeah.
No choices. And I'm their voice today.
And you are their voice tomorrow. I trust. Yeah.
The, these kids, it, it's, it's just too sad.
It's just too sad. You, you gotta do something about me.
Sorry. We, we, we've obviously, what we endeavor to do
as a petitions committee, when someone like you brings, um,
uh, a, a topic, an excellent topic like this
before us, um, we endeavor to look at it from every aspect.
Have you had kickback from anyone from
Oh, huge. Hugely
so. And we are from, um, in relation from to the
FD can that is the national support service, um,
who will be speaking later.
And, and, and I was shown an email with, with huge support.
I got, uh, uh, a thousand, uh, uh, 180, uh,
signatures myself, just in the bay of plenty in worldwide
or nationwide would've been big.
So there's been great support, great interest. Great.
Good on you, mate. We need this. Wanted, wanted and any need
De need detractors, pardon me, any de detractors,
Right?
Three quarters of women know something about it
and say, oh, education not been student.
The men say, ah, I'm not gonna get pregnant.
You know, p**s off. Um, and,
and there were a few who've been teachers who know about it.
Some men don't have the same awareness and concern.
And, and that reads me greatly.
And, and I want them to, um, I I, I say to them,
please, I ask your wife.
Um, there was a, uh, an alcohol industry group
and, um, they were going on about it.
And I said, look, men, ask your wives about it.
They'll tell you, they'll put you straight.
So, yes, yes, there was a, a knowledge deficit,
but every time they pass, they'll, they'll see this thing
and maybe they'll talk about it.
Alright, well look, thank you very much.
Um, feel free just to, um,
and I think you've got support group here too.
Um, so feel free to, um, wait
and if there's anything, we'll come back to you here.
I appreciate you very much. I'm just gonna ask the Minister
of Justice now to come forward.
Should I take the 80 cents?
Somebody Well, here to put, would hate to be accused,
accused of, uh, taking, uh,
taking anything we shouldn't hear,
but, uh, I think it was very effective.
Thank you.
Alright, Harris. And
alright, I'll let you introduce yourself
and, uh, say take your submission as read,
but, uh, certainly keen to time for questions.
And,
Um, Koto, um, chair, I'm Rachel Stockwell.
I'm a senior advisor in the, um,
the victims in Harm reduction team, the Ministry of Justice.
And I'm here with my manager Lisa, on Harris.
And my, my colleague, um, Patrick
Kira. Welcome.
Um, so did you want
A, yeah, so it just speaks
to you essentially the broad outline, um,
of your position, really, um, as much as anything else,
as anything that will help us in a decision making and, um,
and leave time for questions.
Sure, thanks. Um, so, um, the committee asked us
to provide a submission on the
implementation of the proposal.
Um, so, um, our view was that, um,
well particularly whether, um, it would be appropriate
to use regulations, um, to implement it.
Um, our view is that that would be the most appropriate rec,
um, mechanism, um, as opposed to using
the ACT itself, amending the act.
And the reason for that is that, um, it would be, um,
more flexible way of implementing it
and allow for some adjustment more, uh,
to make adjustments over time as needed.
Alright. So the regulations are sufficient
that you believe something like this could be in,
it would be introduced, wouldn't it?
Um, it'd be, it's a,
it's a new, a new provision.
Well there, there is already a provision in the ACT
for the regulations to provide
for something along these lines.
Um, so section 401 B of the Act Act, um,
and just fine with me.
So the, the wording of the, of, um, of that is that,
um, the regulations can provide, um,
information relating to either
or that can, um, sorry,
can provide information relating
to the potential harmful effects of consuming alcohol
on people in general, people of particular kinds,
people in particular situations or to all of them.
Um, so it seems that, um, this kind of signage
that's been proposed would, would fall into that. Can
It man, can it mandate it?
This is the main, this is really the, the point here.
So you could mandate it for the 1200
and 400, 12,465 liquor outs,
the regulations sufficient that should the committee
make a recommendation
and um, go along these, like we, we could recommend
that it be mandated
and it would be able to be done in your view,
under the regulations. Yes.
Yes. Okay. So things like
with the warnings on liquor bottles, would that have come
through your group?
There was, there was another that,
that didn't come as a regulation.
Is that on on bottle?
We don't, sorry, was there, so we don't, it's, it's on,
on liquor bot on labels now.
It's compulsory, isn't it?
Uh, yes. And I, I understand that
that orders on bottles at the moment is agreed
between Australia and New Zealand
and our food standards, uh, codes.
And, um, that's undergoing a regulatory review at the moment
by the Ministry for Regulation.
But it is mandatory in
New Zealand at the moment, isn't it?
That's right. Yeah. That,
that's the main point I was, I was making.
Yeah. And that was done by regulation from your knowledge?
Uh, it's in, it's in the food standards code
that we share with Australia
That didn't require a change in legislation.
That's the, the main, I don't
Believe so. Alright.
Okay. That's it. Thank you.
Sorry, members. Any other questions?
Question I was gonna ask. So just an order in council can
affect this, so there's no, no legislation required,
just the Minister of Justice
or whichever associate has the delegation for this can ask
the Governor General to affect the change.
Mm. And that's your recommendation that they do.
So, so would you have to do, to do that,
presumably the ministry would've
to do quite a bit of policy work on it?
Would you, you'd have to or is that pretty much done?
Well, um, we'd, uh, following, um, your,
receive your report, we'd receive direction from,
from our minister to do the policy work
and then Oh, already,
and then it would need to go to cabinet
for decision. Um, but
We'd follow the usual process for the government response
to a petitions recommendations, which
Would mean talking to the minister
and seeking their views on, on what next steps to take.
Good. Alright. Well thank, that's, uh, reassuring. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Um, sorry me. Any other questions? No,
No, that's great. Is
there any equivalent, sorry, just one thing.
Is there anything that you've done this for?
Any other product or any other in your knowledge
and equivalent of this that you can point to?
Smoking obviously is done many years ago. Mm-hmm.
Um, we are not aware of this particular regulation power
being, having been used before.
So it would be the first time that this, um,
regulation was used.
I just tell what other compulsory warnings are there
around most of it. I'm just trying think,
Uh, the Ministry of Health would be able
to help you with that question.
Alright, well thank you very much.
You, if you feel free to remain,
if there's anything we just wanted
to clarify, we appreciate happy you here.
Thanks. Now, hospitality New Zealand.
Um, Sam McKinnon with Sam here,
or is he line
I just check and see if he's Yes,
I have Actually, I, okay, so right here he is.
Okay.
Kia, good afternoon.
Hey, ura, Sam apologies.
Have you, you've been on the duration of the hearing?
Uh, yes, I have been. Oh,
you've heard our introductions.
10 minutes and the, uh, hopefully lead time for questions.
Yep, absolutely.
Uh, well thank you for the opportunity
to provide feedback on the petition, uh, committee members,
um, as the representative voice of hospitality and, uh,
and obviously a flow on through tourism.
Uh, we represent over two
and a half thousand businesses, uh, primarily bars, cafes,
restaurants, uh, and some com commercial accommodation
and off licenses as well.
So we've got 120 years, uh, history of,
of representing the sector, and we've been steadfast and,
and trying to foster a, a thriving
and responsible sector in that time.
We, we agree that that fetal
to alcohol syndrome disorder is a serious
preventable condition.
Uh, the Ministry of Health
and Health NZ note that there is an estimate
of New Zealanders born with FS D
but there's no data on the prevalence of
of FS D in New Zealand.
Um, we would, we would see
that there is already an awareness around the dangers
of drinking while pregnant
and Health New Zealand continues to develop
to develop awareness campaigns, uh,
and training to support the public with this knowledge.
Pregnancy labeling, as you've already discussed, um, is,
is available on any alcoholic beverage purchased, uh, uh,
through an off-premise environment.
We understand that, uh, ministry of Health and,
and Health New Zealand have recently re released their
comprehensive FSD action, strategic Action plan.
And, uh, this plan recommends targeted responses in
communities deemed at greatest risk.
And so we've, we've met with Ministry of Health on this, uh,
and we've agreed that we will
support these targeted efforts.
Uh, we are appropriate given
that the report emphasizes targeted responses.
Um, we do not believe
that requiring signs in on-premise environments
as a whole is necessary.
Alright, so your, your submission is
that you don't believe it is necessary because
We don't believe it needs to be, needs to be legislated
or regulated as a whole across all licensed environments
because there's already an action plan in place
that's being enacted by the Ministry of Health.
Uh, that's, that has recommended spec targeted responses.
Just, um, so you mostly represent bars, is that right?
Um, bars and
On on-prem. On-premise
operators, correct. On-premise.
So if someone walks into a bar now
and buys a glass, their alcohol in the glass over the bar,
will they see a warning?
If you're ordering it in a pint, there's not a warning
because you're not seeing the cake
that's being delivered in, but I guess,
Or, or, or a glass of wine or a spirit
Glass? Well, you might,
you might see the bottle of wine,
which has the labeling on it,
and if you see the spirits being poured,
that's got labeling on it, I guess what we are saying is
that there is already a level of awareness that, that it is,
uh, that you shouldn't drink while pregnant.
And so, uh, we don't believe that that
that's needed as an additional measure.
Um, and where does that awareness come from, do you think?
Through the campaigns that Health New Zealand Ministry
of Health are running and,
and that, that work has just been reemphasized, uh, and,
and I guess refunded as a result
through the strategic action plan
that was released a couple of months ago.
Alright, members, other questions?
Uh, has there been any testing of
what the awareness is nationally?
Um, I, we haven't done any testing,
but I would expect that Ministry of Health
or Health New Zealand would be able to support that
or support that, that request.
What, what would be the main objection
to this from your members?
We already have a, uh, a number of, uh,
regulation requirements.
Certainly, uh, yesterday's announcement
around the Ministry Regulation review is looking at the
range of things that we are required to do.
And a lot of that can relate around the signage
and the record keeping and the responsibility that, uh,
or the, um, the onus that is placed on venue operators to,
to manage safe and responsible environments.
And we are not saying that, that we are not doing
that already, and we are not trying to suggest that, that,
um, uh,
that across the board we don't have a role to play in that.
We are just suggesting that in this particular instance
where there's not a need for, uh, a, a broad brush approach,
given that the FS d
strategic action plan has recommended targeted responses.
So most bars, um, have got a sign
around not serving intoxicated people.
That is, that, that's mandatory, isn't it? Correct.
Or is that, is that, is that it is mandatory to have
that sign saying we will sue anyone who's
underage or intoxicated.
Um, so putting another sign up like that
saying around pregnancy, um,
warning about pregnancy somewhere in the bar, would
that be a major imposition on your members?
It's a, it's another thing
that we would be required to do.
And so I would expect that there would be a number
of members who would not be, uh, not be happy
with additional requirement.
But as I've said, we are, we are keen
to support the targeted responses based on, uh, the way
that the strategic action plan is written.
Yeah, I I I, I'm old enough to remember the objections
to taking cigarettes outta bars too.
Um, and in fact, most people who were objected
to it found it was actually a
positive at the end of the day.
So I just wonder whether, um, it would have quite the effect
that some of your members may think it would.
Um, because remember that was, that was going to be the end
of live alcohol sales and bars,
but it didn't quite work out that way.
But anyway, that's, uh, that's an observation. Just,
I think that's over to you as the committee
to make your recommendation.
Alright, look, thank you. Sorry.
Any, any other questions, members? Well, thank you.
Thank you, Sam. I appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Thanks, Sam. Appreciate it.
Right now, fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Care Action
Network members.
Right. Great. Thank you. Thanks for your patience.
Did you want me to
called navigations?
Oh, they're just watching. They're not, no, that's fine.
Yeah, they're watching. Thank you.
Oh, Good. Now to,
um, all of the, um, petitions committee this afternoon,
thank you for, um, allowing us to come and speak.
Of course. Stephanie James.
Um, I am the CEO of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder Care Action Network.
FAS CAM is our kind of acronym.
So as you've kind of heard in regard to today,
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is the leading cause
of neurodevelopment, um,
and disability in ula, the Ministry of Health,
as we've heard estimates, it affects between three
and 5% of the population in AL
as such, based on that, it is more prevalent than autism.
Cerebral palsy and Down Syndrome combined.
Its impact on those who are affected
by this neuro disability are profound and lifelong.
Furthermore, it is a major cause of harm
to others due to alcohol.
And as we've heard with the annual cost
of $4.8 billion per annum in,
and that's based on the cost
of alcohol related harms report from N-Z-D-I-R
last year, 2024.
The importance of the issue is highlighted
by a recently released government action plan,
which we heard just
before from a previous speaker on FASD from 2025
to 2028, with a considerable amount of invested, uh,
from the alcohol levy
to change the awareness under understanding
and supporting those with FASD and their whanau
and New Zealand.
There is a need for that.
So the awareness is there for the, for the need.
One of the key outcomes
of this action plan is growing awareness
and again, preventing harm.
The action plan states, um, New Zealand is a society where
families are supported to nurture alcohol-free pregnancies.
The risk of drinking during pregnancy are well understood.
So these are their goals. FASD, without stigma
and the prevalence of,
and the impact of FASD as well recognized and this petition,
and hopefully this action is one step towards that.
So, make no mistake,
this is a significant issue on a personal
and societal level, and adopting the recommendation
and the petition would make a significant contribution
to reducing harm
and achieving the objectives of the FASD action plan.
And I think you just need to ask midwives, you know,
the knowledge of actually
how much awareness is out there right now about
drinking and with young women.
So, you know, I would just like, just to kind of err on that
with the previous, uh, speakers.
Um, suggestion kilda. I'm just gonna hand it over to Byron.
Welcome. Byron.
Hi. Thank you. Um, thank you for having us today.
Um, yeah, my name's Byron.
Um, and yeah, my life has been, uh, impacted by FASD, um,
and I've had, uh, significant problems
because of, um, this condition during my life.
Um, so I'm 2028 now, um,
and I'm part of, uh, one of the co-leaders for a, um,
a development program called tu.
Um, and that's a community of, um, of young people
and all ranges of, of all range of ages of, um, people
with FSD.
And, um, we've developed a manifesto.
And in that manifesto, one of the key, um, points
that has come out of it is that, um, that we would all like,
um, more awareness nationwide.
Alright, thank you. C can I just ask a question?
So, uh, was it, um,
can you remember recognizing at the stage you realized
that something was, that you were different, uh,
from pay your peers Yes.
All this. Yeah. And what, what led you to
perhaps, or the diagnosis you've brought through, obviously
through experts or drug medics? Medics?
Yeah, so I did notice, um, at quite an early age that, um,
probably about in primary, primary, primary school that, um,
I was different and I was having, um, behavioral issues, um,
as well as just noticing internal, um, that I was not, um,
not like other, like my peers.
Um, but as I got older, there was, um, yeah, significant,
um, problems with, um, with justice and, um, education
and, um, health and all of these areas.
And, um, that led to a diagnosis, um, by a psychologist, um,
Valerie McGinn in Auckland.
Well, look, thank you for your courage coming here.
Not only here today, but obviously, um, you are now
doing the same work in many other forums.
So firstly, on behalf of the committee
and Parliament, I say thank you
for your courage in doing that.
Uh, it must be a very difficult thing to do mm-hmm.
Um, to actually come into places like
us and tell your story.
So we do appreciate that. Oh,
Thank you. Cheer.
Um, of course, what we are really here now is that you've,
you've heard our petitioner and, um, you've heard the,
the response, I guess from the industry.
Mm. Um,
and now it behooves us as a committee to say, right,
well we've heard this, um, we've heard that from the, um,
officials that it can actually now be done.
Mm. We don't, sounds like we don't need a law change.
That's right. Which is a and that is quite important.
The law change can take, even at the best of time, um,
can take a couple of two
or three years while the time the work's done it's written,
whereas to know that the, there's the capability, um,
of this able to be achieved.
Um mm-hmm. Um, so now, sorry.
Sorry, I was going to talk as well. Yes.
No, no. Speak. Yes. Go, go ahead. Okay.
Right, Koto called Lee Henderson toa.
Um, I'm Lee Henderson, I'm chair of FASD can, um,
but relevant to this, I worked for the Trans Taman, um,
food agency that was responsible
for mandating packaged alcohol.
So I am very, very familiar with the evidence base
that went into that.
So, so man made mandating warnings on all
Alcohol on packaged alcohol. Yes.
And is that standard Australian?
I didn't quite understand that from before.
It's, it's in the Food standard code.
So it was adopted by the New Zealand Food Safety Minister
when it was mandated through feans.
Right. So, um,
and um, when that, the conclusion from that at the time was
that that was just one piece of the puzzle in terms
of raising awareness
and it was required that there would be a suite of measures.
So what you are considering today is an adjunct to that
to raise, raise awareness.
So we did hear, um, from Hospitality New Zealand about, um,
people are aware of, um, FASD.
I think we have no evidence on that.
You did ask that question.
There's been no study,
but I gave a lecture on FASD
to psychology students at the Victoria University this year,
and I asked them to put up their hands.
There's a hundred in the room, mostly females
'cause they're psychology students.
How many were aware of the campaign that was going on
and three, put up their hand.
So there is a real need for increasing the awareness
of FASD.
Can I just ask with the hand up,
did you then subsequently ask how many of them knew
How many knew about the campaign? That No. No,
But how many knew that you
shouldn't drink when you're pregnant? Well,
That was the whole purpose of the, the lecture was
to talk about FASD.
So I didn't ask that specific question.
Um, I th personally, I think that's an important question
because how do we know the effectiveness
of the action plan if we don't know how many are, um,
unaware at this point,
but we, we do know, um, from personal experience of, um,
within the family that doctors aren't asking about pregnancy
during, you know, when, when a woman comes into pregnant
about whether they're drinking or not, there is still a lack
of, um, awareness and understanding around the face.
So doc doctors are not doing that.
They're not asking those questions. No.
So, um, you know, then what they'll ask about smoking, um,
I this will, this will be part of the broader action plan
that, um, that those sorts of, um,
pieces will be put in place.
Pardon? But you've gotta look at as much as you can
to actually raise, raise that awareness.
And, um, so when, um, s looked at the mandating of,
um, packaged alcohol, they did a economic analysis
and they found that there was a, a very, um, low number of,
um, pregnancies that you would reduce being alcohol exposed
that would offset the cost of packaged alcohol.
And Stephanie mentioned the figure of $4.8 billion per year
as the cost of, um, alcohol.
Now putting, packaged, uh,
putting labels within licensed premises warning signs is
gonna be much, much cheaper than redesigning labels.
So it's gonna be a far more cost effective measure, um,
to actually raise awareness.
Um, and, um, this is not just about females.
It's changing the social norms
that when know a woman is pregnant, people around her
as well will actually see those warning
labels and be supportive.
That's one of the big, big issues we heard recently
of a woman who felt she had to move from her town,
that when she was pregnant,
because she would not be able to maintain
a alcohol-free pregnancy just
because the societal norms around there.
So we really need not just to address women,
but to address society understanding
of the risk of pregnancy.
Um, we heard from the Ministry of Justice, which confirms
that the implementation, um, can be done by a modest change.
Sorry, Mr. Are you having difficulty hearing?
Are you able to hear, um,
because you're welcome to come if
you are having difficulty hearing. I just noticed,
Oh, sorry.
Feel free to have a seat. Sorry.
I just noticed there was Okay,
Fine.
Sorry. Carry on. So in this submission, the Ministry
of Health also acknowledged the impact of FASD
and highlighted the renewed government
action to raise awareness.
Um, they targeted, um, FASD prevention messages
to raise awareness of the risk of prenatal alcohol exposure
and they support efforts to, um, uh, reduce the risk
of drinking during pregnancy and understanding that.
And our, um, submission set out the evidence
of the successful adoption
of this measure in other jurisdictions.
Um, Chris talked about, um, the adoption in Canada,
but um, in a number of American states as well.
Um, and the requirements of, um,
pregnancy warning sign have been imposed as a condition
of some liquor licenses already in artero New Zealand,
an indication of the ease
with which this measure could be introduced.
So I'm now gonna address the meaningless
statement of hospitality.
New Zealand have already talked about the level of awareness
of the risks, um, no evidence based around that.
Um, but also I guess that their, um, submission also,
um, suggested that no action should be taken
until the action plan is published.
Well, of course, subsequent to that submission,
the action plan has been published,
and this is, um, typical of the delaying tactics,
which were evident throughout the 20 years of maintaining
packaged, um, alcohol mandatory labeling.
The alcohol industry, um, tried to stop
that at every point along the way.
So I put to you, um, it's an important measure.
The in has dried, the time is now, the support's there,
the costs are minimal, the need is pressing,
the success is documented internationally,
and the regulatory pathway is clear.
So I put to you that this proposal should be implemented
to address the levels of the long harm of FSD
as you've heard from personal experience
and as we hear from our members and our families.
So as a stand, you obviously there's a number
of strategies you're employing,
but as a standalone strategy, as a, um,
recommendation that this, this, this provision be adopted
by regulation, as we've heard it can be.
Yes. It's not a standalone
'cause we've got the package alcohol with the label,
and we have got the publicity campaign.
So it is a sweeter measures.
Um, it's just really, really important to raise that level
of awareness within our society.
This is a really misunderstood,
I did notice the raised eyebrows when Stephanie talked about
it being more common than autism
and cerebral palsy and downs.
People just don't understand it.
It's not eligible for disability support.
It's misunderstood through schools.
Anything that we can do to raise that awareness of the risk,
because it really, it's a lifelong, um,
disability. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
And I think, would it be fair to say there's a belief that
it's only people who drink lots during pregnancy?
Yeah, that's right. Um, that actually,
and clearly from the literature we've had today, there's,
it doesn't take much. No.
Yes, exactly. That's right.
And, and the issue is that there is, well, the levels
of drinking in New Zealand are going down.
There's still a very high level of binge drinking
and young adults.
But the other, um, concern is that, um, up
to 15% of people through continue
to break throughout pregnancy.
And many of those are actually old term terminology,
but women in their thirties to forties
who are having their glass of wine, at the end of the day,
you know, the, the stress of raising a child and,
and whatever they're continuing to drink.
So it's not just that first bit when the pregnancy is not
recognized, it's actually drinking throughout
pregnancy. Hmm.
Okay. And just finally, um, consistently,
what's the biggest kickback you get
Haven Haven't what we heard
from the Hospitality Association.
Yes. Is that a pretty typical
Response? Yes,
absolutely.
Yes. And, and clearly, you know, the members,
they don't want, they see it as another imposition
of another must do another regulation. Well,
It's on the wall. Mm.
I mean, it's a one off kind of push really.
So as a regulation, you know, I mean,
we we're not asking them to tell women off
if they're pregnant and drinking.
We are just asking them to be having that awareness there.
It's on the wall, you know, you just have
to question the imposition of that.
And again, finding fair enough to say
that you could go drinking
and get drunk without seeing a warning currently,
if you didn't actually Yes.
Weren't drinking out of a,
Well, if you were being served a a glass,
you have no, which,
Which you might argue that having that in a
licensed premises would be more important
because that's generally the only place you don't. Yes,
Yes.
You don't have control of the container
that you're, that's being used.
I think it's also worth bringing up.
50% of pregnancies in New Zealand are unplanned
and it would just be a reminder of somebody walking in,
could I be pregnant or not?
Because that's real risk
that most pregnancies are not recognized until eight weeks.
And so that's also the target as well is
so unplanned pregnancies
And mm-hmm.
Well, look. Well, thank you very much. Okay.
It's been a excellent, and, uh, again, um, Mr.
In Ingram, thank you for bringing this to our attention.
We will now report, um, back
and, um, we've got plenty of material to report with.
Great. Thank you. Very well informed. You dear. Thank you.
Thank, thanks very much.
And again, thank you all for your patience with that,
with our fluid environments.